# Red Storm Rising by Tom Clancy

_5/10. Entertaining and realistic, but harbours a server problem._

**Contains spoilers**

When I started this book, I knew what I was getting myself into. It's a 1000-page techno-thriller which promises to explore an alternate 1980s, in which a military conflict erupts between NATO and Russia. It does so in depth. Serious depth.

If you're not interested in submarine warfare or military tactics, I would steer far away from Clancy's novel. It eschews characterisation and thematic undertones for an unabashed military fantasy, more focused on the latest technology than on those who put it to use. In this focus it succeeds, the plot both plausible and genuinely exciting (in the sort of way we tend to be excited by the worst-case scenario in any situation). Clancy does a fine job combining the small- and large-scale, the broader political and strategic machinations of the war told through the lens of smaller confrontations and the experiences of the numerous characters.

While I found the land- and air-based campaigns particularly fascinating, at least half of the book is spent underwater, and although the intensely detailed descriptions of subsurface combat are at first interesting and dynamic, after the tenth encounter with an enemy submarine it did become tiresome. Considering Clancy's fame for another doorstop specifically focusing on a single submarine, it's easy to see where his interests lie.

Despite the plot-focused nature of the novel, I also genuinely enjoyed many of the characters it followed. The international focus was a breath of fresh air: while Clancy did paint the higher echelons of the Russian government as almost cartoonishly evil, he managed to steer clear of the sort of jingoism I was expecting and presented the remainder of the Russian characters as three-dimensional, nuanced, and moral actors, with no more interest in war than the Americans.

As I read on, however, the glaring problem with the novel's characters became clear: they were all men. Granted, the military in the 1980s wasn't packed with women, but there are literally two female characters in the entire novel. What annoyed me more is the complete one-dimensionality of these two. The first is a fighter pilot who is apparently concerned only by her own gender, and whether she's the first woman to do something. The self-consciousness of Clancy's desperate attempt to include a female character is striking. The second presents an even greater problem: her entire story arc is centered around being saved by a man. She is raped, sees her whole family die, then immediately falls in love with the soldier who saves her and never again speaks of those terrible events. I found the story-line, and the many descriptions of her attractiveness and the soldier's feelings towards her, to be utterly repugnant. It's not as if Clancy was exploring the way survivors of traumatic events cope by latching on to their rescuers, or by suppressing their emotions. She is portrayed purely as a beautiful damsel in distress, ready for a white knight to save her.

Nevertheless, the plot was captivating, and I finished the way-too-long book in no time at all. It's not going to win any awards, or really leave much of an impression at all, and it's marred by a decidedly sexist approach to its characters. But for a story in its purest form, _Red Storm Rising_ is simply a good read.
